           A FAST EIKONAL EQUATION SOLVER FOR PARALLEL SYSTEMS
                                    WON-KI JEONG        AND ROSS T. WHITAKER∗


    Abstract. This paper presents a novel solver for the eikonal equation that is designed to run efficiently on massively
parallel systems. The proposed method manages a list of active nodes and iteratively updates the solutions on those grid
points until they converge. The management of the list does not entail the extra burden of ordered data structures. The
proposed method has suboptimal worst-case performance, but in practice, on real and synthetic datasets, it performs fewer
computations per node than optimal alternatives. Furthermore, the proposed method uses local, synchronous updates
and therefore has better cache coherency, is simple to implement, and scales efficiently on parallel architectures, e.g.,
multiprocessor systems or GPUs (graphics processing units). The paper describes the method, the implementation on the
GPU, and performance analysis that compares against the state-of-the-art eikonal solvers.


    1. Introduction. The eikonal equation, which is a nonlinear Hamilton-Jacobi partial differential
equation (PDE), is given by
                                                                   1
(1.1)                              H(x, ∇x) = |∇φ(x)|2 −                = 0, ∀x ∈ Ω
                                                                f 2 (x)
where Ω is a domain in Rn , φ(x) is the travel time or distance from the source, and f (x) is a positive
speed function defined on Ω. The application of the solutions of eikonal equation is numerous, e.g.,
computer vision [2, 9, 13], image processing [5, 11], and geoscience [8, 12, 6].
     A number of different numerical strategies have been proposed to efficiently solve the eikonal equation.
These include iterative schemes [9], expanding box schemes [3, 14, 17], expanding wavefront schemes [7,
10, 16], and sweeping schemes [15, 18]. Among these strategies, the most efficient eikonal equation
solvers are based on adaptive updating schemes and ordered data structures. For instance, the Fast
Marching Method (FMM) [10], which is optimal in the worst case, uses a heap data structure, which
includes nodes from the entire wavefront. During each iteration, the heap determines the as yet unsolved
grid value that is guaranteed to depend only on neighbors whose values are solved. The heap must
be updated with each updated grid value (O(log N )) and each grid point is solved only once. For this
algorithm, the heap becomes a bottleneck especially on higher dimensional datasets, and does not readily
allow for parallel solutions, such as those available with single instruction multiple datastream (SIMD)
or multicore processors, which are currently the most cost effective way of organizing parallel compute
power. Furthermore, grid points must be updated one at a time, in a way that does not guarantee locality,
opportunities for coherency in cache or local memory.
     Even though there exists theoretically optimal approaches to solve eikonal equations, they are not
fast enough on many applications in practice. For example, the 3D prestack seismic migration process [6]
should compute 5D traveltime tables, which consist of point-to-point traveltimes between surface points
(2D) to all volume grid points (3D), and requires running the eikonal solver a huge number of times.
Tracking the multiple phases of seismic wave reflections also requires multiple solutions of eikonal equa-
tions with various boundary conditions [8]. Interactive computation of skeletons from dynamic 3D models
is another application of fast eikonal solvers [13]. In such applications, faster solvers can greatly reduce
the running time and allow interactivity, and therefore the need for fast parallel algorithms still remains.
     In this paper we propose a novel numerical algorithm, which we call the Fast Iterative Method
(FIM), to solve eikonal equations on massively parallel architectures. The proposed method relies on a
modification of an iterative solution of the upwind discretization of the equation. Unlike the traditional
iterative schemes, the proposed method selectively updates the points chosen by a convergence measure
and avoids using expensive ordered data structures or special updating orders. The method is simple
to implement and faster than the existing methods on a wide range of speed functions in two and three
dimensions. In addition, the proposed algorithm can be easily ported to parallel architectures, including
multicore processors, cluster systems, or graphics processing units. In the following sections, we show the
proposed algorithm, the implementation details on the GPU, and the performance comparison with an
existing, optimal solver.
   ∗ Scientific Computing and Imaging institute, School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah

84112 (wkjeong,whitaker@cs.utah.edu).
                                                            1
     2. Algorithm. FIM is developed based on the observations from the two well-known numerical
eikonal solvers. One is the iterative method introduced by Rouy et al. in [9], which updates the solution
for every point iteratively until it converges using a Godunov discretization of Hamiltonian. This method
does not rely on the causality principle. It is simple to implement, but it is inefficient, because every grid
point must be visited (and a quadratic evaluated) until the entire grid has converged. The other related
approach is FMM [10], which uses the idea of a narrow band of points on the wavefront, and thereby
updates points selectively (one at a time) by managing a heap.
     The main idea of FIM is to solve the eikonal equation selectively on the grid points in parallel without
maintaining expensive data structures. FIM maintains a narrow band, called active list, for storing the
points that are being updated. Instead of using a special data structure to keep track of exact causal
relationships, we maintain a looser relationship and update all such points simultaneously. At each
iteration, we expand the list of active points, and the band thickens or expands to include all points
that could be influenced by the current updates. A point can be removed from active list only when its
solution has converged—that is, it solves the local H-J approximation relative to its upwind neighbors.
To update the solutions of the points in the active list, we use the Godunov upwind discretization of the
eikonal equation (Eq 2.1) and solve the equation for Ui,j,k using a quadratic solver.
             "                        #2       "              ymin +
                                                                        #2     "                    #2
                            xmin +                 (Ui,j,k − Ui,j,k )                     zmin +
                 (Ui,j,k − Ui,j,k )                                            (Ui,j,k − Ui,j,k )              1
(2.1)                                      +                                 +                           =    2
                         hx                               hy                           hz                    fi,j,k

                                                                                                          pmin
where Ui,j,k is the discrete approximation to φ at x = (i, j, k), hp is a grid spacing along the axis p, Ui,j,k
                                                         +
is the smallest neighbor value along the axis p, and (x) = max(x, 0).
     The main algorithm consists of two parts, the initialization and the updating. In the initialization
step, we set the boundary conditions on the grid, and set the values of the rest of the grid points to
infinity (or a numerical placeholder for that value). The 1-neighbors of the source points are then added
to the active list L. In the updating step, for every point x = (i, j, k) we compute the new Ui,j,k by
solving Eq 2.1 and check if the point is converged by comparing the previous and the new Ui,j,k values.
If so, we remove the point from L and any 1-neighbor points that are not in L and have values that are
down wind (greater than Ui,j,k ) are added to L. Note that newly added points must be updated in the
next updating iteration. The updating step is repeated until L is empty.
     3. GPU Implementation. The GPU has evolved into a highly parallelized SIMD multiprocessor
machine, meaning that the same instructions can be applied to multiple streams of fragments in par-
allel. In addition, the GPU supports the high precision computation (up to 32bit float), and is fully
programmable. Due to their increasing computational power and flexibility, current GPUs are becoming
a very powerful computational platform for general-purpose computation problems as well as traditional
computer graphics tasks. Therefore, we have chosen the GPU to implement our parallel eikonal equation
solver and conducted the performance analysis. Note that the proposed method can be also easily ported
to the other parallel architectures, e.g., multicore processors, shared memory multiprocessor machines,
or cluster systems.
     The major difference between the CPU and the GPU implementation is that the GPU employs a
tile-based updating scheme, as proposed in [4]. The idea is that the domain is decomposed into the pre-
defined size tiles (in our implementation we use a 83 cube for 3D), and solutions of all pixels in the tiles
are updated in parallel. Therefore, the active list of the GPU maintains the list of active tiles instead of
points. Since the computation on the GPU is done by drawing quads using the graphics API, a tile-based
update scales much better than a pixel-based update on the GPU.
     The GPU algorithm consists of four steps. First, each active tile is updated with a given number of
iterations. During each iteration, a new solution of Eq 2.1 is computed, and its convergence is encoded
using negative/positive signs, e.g., converged values are stored in positive but not-yet-converged values
are stored in negative values, to minimize GPU memory use. Note that only the new solution that is
smaller than the previous solution will be updated, and the convergence is determined if the difference
of previous and new solution is within the threshold. After the update step, we perform a reduction
on each tile, i.e., 8-to-1 mapping on 3D, to check whether the tile is converged or not. For a n3 sized
                                                                2
tile, we need log2 n reduction iterations to shrink a tile into a pixel (e.g., 83 tile requires log2 8 = 3
reduction iterations). The first reduction iteration converts the positive/negative signs into 0 or 1, and
the following reduction iterations check if any of eight pixel values is 1. If so, set the pixel value after
reduction as 1, or set it as 0 otherwise. The third step is checking the neighborhood tiles if any pixels
in the current tile is upwind of its neighbors to update the active list. In this step, all the neighborhood
tiles of the to-be-removed tiles are updated once and check if any pixel value is changed. The final step
is updating the active list. To do this, we perform another reduction on the neighborhood tiles. Each
pixel of resulting volume of the reduction operation represents whether the corresponding tile should be
added to or removed from the active list.
     We use OpenGL API and Nvidia Cg shader language to implement the proposed algorithm on the
GPU. A 3D volume on the GPU is implemented as a set of 2D float textures, and each texture packs
four z-slice to utilize vector ALUs on the GPU. Instead of reading back the active list volume to the
CPU memory and selectively drawing quads, we store all geometry on the GPU side using the vertex
buffer object and selectively draw quads by checking the corresponding value in the active list volume in
the vertex shader stage using the vertex texture fetch function. For each update step, a target texture
is attached to the framebuffer object and off-screen rendering is performed. To quickly determine the
convergence of the solver, we use the occlusion query test to see if the active list is empty or not.
    4. Results. We have tested our GPU eikonal solver on several synthetic datasets and compared the
running time with a Fast Marching solver on the CPU. The test PC is equipped with an Intel Core 2
Duo 2.4Ghz CPU and an Nvidia 7900 GTX GPU. We use an optimized ITK [1] implementation of the
Fast Marching solver for a fair comparison.
    Table 4.1 lists the running time on the various input volumes of size 2563, and figure 4.1 shows the
level sets of the solution on each input volume. As shown in table 4.1, the GPU eikonal solver runs about
seven times faster than the CPU solver on all input speed volumes.
                                                  Table 4.1
                            Running time (in second) on various input speed volumes

                                            Single    Three      Random       Coherent
                         FMM (CPU)          69.75     69.563      81.875       80.625
                         FIM (GPU)          11.328    14.937      14.25        13.687




    (a) Single speed            (b) Three speed               (c) Random speed                 (d) Coherent speed

                       Fig. 4.1. Level set of the solutions from the synthetic speed volumes

     Figure 4.2 shows a geoscience application of the eikonal solver. Due to the heterogeneous rock mate-
rials, the seismic wave propagation speed varies depending on the rock properties. Figure 4.2 (a) shows
the input speed volume (blue is the slowest while red is the fastest speed). Figure 4.2 (b) shows the level
set of the seismic wave propagation from the seed point. We use a 256x160x256 size volume, and a single
propagation takes about eight seconds on the GPU solver and a minute on the CPU solver. Because the
GPU solver takes only a few seconds to run, users can change the seed position and simulate seismic
propagation interactively on reasonably sized datasets. Moreover, the GPU solvers can greatly reduce
                                                        3
the computation time for the applications of using multiple solutions of eikonal equations, e.g., track-
ing the multiple phases of seismic wave reflections and seismic tomography [8], and seismic traveltimes
computation [6].




            (a) Synthetic speed volume                                         (b) Level set of solution

                               Fig. 4.2. Wave propagation in the synthetic speed volume


    5. Conclusion. In this paper we describe a novel parallel algorithm for an eikonal equation solver
and its implementation on the GPU. The proposed method scales well on the massively parallel archi-
tectures, and our GPU implementation shows about seven times performance gain over the traditional
CPU-based eikonal solver. For future work, developing a parallel algorithm for general Hamilton-Jacobi
equations will be an extension of this method. Porting the proposed algorithm to the newer GPU architec-
ture that supports GPGPU (General-Purpose computation on the GPU) API will be another interesting
area of future work and should result in further improvements in run-time performance.

                                                     REFERENCES

 [1] The insight segmentation and registration toolkit. http://www.itk.org.
 [2] A. Bruss. The eikonal equation: some results applicable to computer vision. J. Math. Phy., 23(5):890–896, 1982.
 [3] W. Schneider Jr., K. Ranzinger, A. Balch, and C. Kruse. A dynamic programming approach to first arrival traveltime
          computation in media with arbitrarily distributed velocities. Geophysics, 57(1):39–50, 1992.
 [4] A. Lefohn, J. Kniss, C. Hansen, and R. Whitaker. Interactive deformation and visualization of level set surfaces using
          graphics hardware. In IEEE Visualization 2003 Conference Proceedings, pages 75–82, 2003.
 [5] R. Malladi and J. Sethian. A unified approach to noise removal, image enhancement, and shape recovery. IEEE Trans.
          on Image Processing, 5(11):1554–1568, 1996.
 [6] A. Popovici and J. Sethian. 3-d imaging using higher order fast marching traveltimes. Geophysics, 67(2):604–609,
          March-April 2002.
 [7] F. Qin, Y. Luo, K. Olsen, W. Cai, and G. Schuster. Finite-difference solution of the eikonal equation along expanding
          wavefronts. Geophysics, 57(3):478–487, 1992.
 [8] N. Rawlinson and M. Sambridge. The fast marching method: an effective tool for tomographics imaging and tracking
          multiple phases in complex layered media. Exploration Geophysics, 36:341–350, 2005.
 [9] E. Rouy and A. Tourin. A viscosity solutions approach to shape-from-shading. SIAM Journal of Numerical Analysis,
          29:867–884, 1992.
[10] J. Sethian. A fast marching level set method for monotonically advancing fronts. In Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., volume 93,
          pages 1591–1595, February 1996.
[11] J. Sethian. Level set methods and fast marching methods. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
[12] R. Sheriff and L. Geldart. Exploration Seismology. Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[13] K. Siddiqi, S. Bouix, A. Tannenbaum, and S. Zucker. The hamilton-jacobi skeleton. In Proc. International Conference
          on Computer Vision, pages 828–834, September 1999.
[14] J. Trier and W. Symes. Upwind finite-difference calculation of traveltimes. Geophysics, 56(6):812–821, June 1991.
[15] Y. Tsai. Rapid and accurate computation of the distance function using grids. J. Comp. Phys., 178(1):175–195, 2002.
[16] J. Tsitsiklis. Efficient algorithms for globally optimal trajectories. IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, 40(9):1528–
          1538, September 1995.
[17] J. Vidale. Finite-difference calculation of traveltimes in three dimensions. Geophysics, 55(5):521–526, 1990.
[18] H. Zhao. A fast sweeping method for eikonal equations. Mathematics of Computation, 74:603–627, 2004.

                                                            4
